**July 8, 2020**

## CLI refactor

CLI isn't a node only thing, can also run in deno
Compiler can work in browser, node, or deno; proves it out

Difference now is you're passing in a System
Could run Node shell, but have Stencil compiler run in Deno. Might have some security benefits
Perf slightly faster; though workers are slightly slower

Mostly experimental. Verifies abstractness, continue worked on online REPL

## 1.15 & 1.16

* Mostly bugfixes and system refactor for deno
* If using webworkers and running in CDN might get CORS issue. base64s the loader
* Enhancements to custom elements builds. Using in ionic vue, react, capacitor. everything is synchronous. depends on treeshaking for perf, tooling is better now
* If wanted to ship, stencil's runtime would have a dependency

## Forms

* Building out `@stencil/forms`
* Works to solve a11y, no UI or validation system better. Easier to use native elements
* Connects aria labels, descriptions, etc
* All set through JSX; uses HTML5 attributes
* Don't have to hook into onsubmit; everything is hooked upto input fields
* Generally feels ready to go; need to test select elements
* Solves some problems around shadow dom, might use in Ionic
* Discussion around using spread operator vs functional component

## Animations

* Working to move Ionic's current animation library into its own package, which can be consumed by Stencil
* Using web animations and other native features

## Modes

* Was building chunk per component per mode
* Now building per component; will include all the modes
* Should help with switching modes, mixing modes
* Should be faster builds. Angular going from 130 to 80 entry points

# Q&A

## Router

* 2.0 is simpler; used in Capacitor docs, next Ionic docs
* Has some issues around flickering that needs resolved before moving out of experimental

## IE11

* ES5 builds not going anywhere soon
* Stencil 2 will make IE support opt-in, not going to remove it

## Lazy Loading

* Can be rough with cascade, network timeout/failures, etc
* How do you balance sync "everything should be there" with lazy loading
* Maybe workable with router, similar to React's "suspense"
* Added a `preloadComponent` API to programmatically load elements in JS
