# 2020-04-08 Meeting Notes

In Stencil 1.12.x the new compiler is the default and the legacy compiler has been removed.

## config.extras

The extras have been added to Stencil in order to configure the build and optimize for the target rendering platform.

https://stenciljs.com/docs/config-extras

## dist-custom-elements-bundle

The Stencil team is working on documentation to explain how the output targets work

## Rollup 2

The Stencil team has started working on a solution to begin using workers which will be compatible with Rollup as Manu has been working with the Rollup team to make this available.

Manu described a problem related to how Rollup handles synthetic name exports and what are the problems that arise from using commonjs with Rollup and this approach. Sometimes it is not possible to maintain a clean and consistent way of importing commonjs dependencies in Rollup because of commonjs' dymanic nature.

https://github.com/rollup/rollup/pull/3319

## config.taskQueue

There was a bit of discussion about how the task queue types work. The default is congestionAsync but the Stencil team considers the async is the type that will be preferred by most applications' needs.

https://stenciljs.com/docs/config#taskqueue

## @stencil/store

There is a new solution for global state released by the Stencil team: @stencil/store

https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil-store

It can be used as a fundational piece and simplifies state management and render needs by only triggering re-renders on the components that are listening to the specific store key. @stencil/store is not a part of the core library and can be used separately.

The Stencil store looks like a JS object that knows exactly what to render whenever one of the keys change.


## Conversation about Stencil 2

In General it will bring no breaking changes to components built with Stencil 1.x but there will be breaking changes to defaults and configuration keys.

Adam shared a working document in which they detail the importance of using CSS imports instead of `styleURL`


## CSS Parts

Also now it will be able to use CSS parts as style hooks within stencil by using the part attribute:

`<div part="knob"></div>`

Manu described the @Part decorator that will allow to simplify documentation and gather it within the README file.


## Prerender config

Adam described the idea of using a pre-render configuration file that will allow to set up all of the necessary items related to pre-rendering an application and have it be part of the build process.

-----------

Questions:

Michel: Is there a path to update the Webpack stencil plugin to support Stencil 1?

Answer: No because the problem with using Webpack to bundle would mean that each one of the gathered packages would generate it's own runtime instead of having one runtime that coverns everything. With bundle optimization in mind using webpack is not a good approach.

Jordan: Some of the consumers for their components have been having problems with Server Side Rendering, how to know which parts to render and which parts not to render on the server?

Answer: Adam offered a solution that has simplifies knowing if the document is defined: `typeof document !== 'undefined'`

Manu commented that it is also possible to use the Build Stencil dependency to encapsulate portions of the code that should only be rendered in the front-end in order to avoid these problems:

https://stenciljs.com/docs/prerendering#things-to-watch-for

Jordan also shared the work his team has done with Storybook and how they are simplifying documentation:

DOCS generated: https://docs.amplify.aws/ui/auth/authenticator?framework=react

Source Code: https://github.com/aws-amplify/amplify-js/tree/master/packages/amplify-ui-storybook


Finally Manu shared how Stencil is using the DOCS output in order to generate an api spec that becomes in turn a document that simplifies tracking changes in components and styles.

Script: https://github.com/ionic-team/ionic/blob/master/core/scripts/api-spec-generator.js

Result: https://github.com/ionic-team/ionic/blob/master/core/api.txt