**August 12, 2020**

## Introducing Stencil v2

- Adam is going through the new features and breaking changes of Stencil v2.

- The breaking change is the fact that IE and Edge are disabled by default. It is possible to re-enable them via configuration.

- Simon and Adam are exchanging on the contributor channel about new default, es5, opt-in/opt-out and production build.

- `disconnectCallback` is the new standard because `didUnload` worked only 95% of the time. Angular for instance reuses instances so it is not stable to connect and disconnect.

- `async` is the default for taskQueue for improved performance.

- However, the `immediate` task queue doesn't have the request animation frame and for that reason is going to be better rated by benchmark tools as it accelerate the rendering.

- Node v12.10 is the new minimal requirement.

- The build is upgraded to ES2018.

- v2 will be kept under prerelease until TypeScript v4 will be out. TS will be just better at checking the application but no major breaking changes.

- Some breaking changes have been made internally, but it is just smarter now 😉.

- ReflectAttribute changed to just `reflect` and Stencil will throw a warning asking you to fix it.

- Some bugs fix have been implemented too (one for Safari v10 and another for an issue in the immediate queue)

- Styles are not consumed as esm imports.

```
import { Component, h } from '@stencil/core';
++ import styles from './styles.css';
@Component({
  tag: 'hello-vdom',
++  styles,
})
export class HelloWorld {
  render() {
    return <h1>Hello VDom!</h1>;
  }
}
```

The example can be found in the following [hello-vdom.tsx](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil/blob/main/test/hello-vdom/src/components/hello-vdom.tsx).

Sass should be consumed the same way but it has not yet been tested.

Style consumption works in an identical scoped way as it is working today.

Adam is also showing a unit test to display what's happening right now with styles (see `static get styles()` in [parse-styles.spec.ts](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil/blob/735a1a14eb688ce2bd75785a566f2249c6f78f38/src/compiler/transformers/test/parse-styles.spec.ts#L75)).

In short: "that's how is it working now  - Adam".

## Terser v5

- the new version (v5) of Terser, for minification, is coming and will be integrated. It includes a better async/await support.

## Contributors questions 

### Debug minify

Matthias is asking how is it possible to track/debug minify errors.

### Function Component And React Bindings

Ashika is asking about Functional Component used in React Bindings because of rendering issues.

Sam has maybe also a related issue (I did not properly understand, my data connection was pretty unstable 😅).

Adam asks if this happens with the very last release of the DS output (has they released a new version really recently). He will ask Josh (who's now in another team) to have a look.

Resources:
* [stencil-ds-output-targets](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil-ds-output-targets)
* [react-output-target](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil-ds-output-targets/tree/master/packages/react-output-target)

### Best Way To Pass Data Down And Bindings

Akisha has also a question regarding the development of renderless components in order to pass down data (like for example `@Props`) to components added as slots.

Adam answered that the preferred solution to pass data down would be the Stencil Store.

Akisha said there was issue with this store and the bindings.

The related issue: [#109](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil-ds-output-targets/issues/109).

Adam said it's probably an esm/commonjs issue.

(Adam's puppy 🐕 is barking, I guess his dog does not like bundling issue neither).

After discussion, it's maybe a bug in the core regarding export. Akisha will update the issue to provide a bit more details.

### Readonly Store For Children

Akisha ask if it is possible to make the Stencil store `readonly` for the children?

Adam said not yet, but he discussed that with Manu. They think it is possible with types. He's also really into it and would love to get a PR about it.

### Memory Issues

Cory is asking if anyone is having memory issues?

He is not sure if it is Stencil related. He spent a lot of type debugging but did not find anything.

It can be debugged with Chrome. The DOM count keep increasing even if everything is properly cleaned.

He faces the problem in a dashboard with a calendar containing many "dominos".

It finds place inside a tab inside a split-pane, so he will try to extract that to a plain page.

The details of his issue is the following:

* Loading the page and taking a heap snapshot I can see I already have detached DOM nodes
* e.g. https://beta.sworkit.com/collections/flexibility-challenge
* maybe the elements going from loading to loaded state - but shouldn't they be fully removed?

### Event Listener And Lighthouse

Adam ask about "my" issue [#2621](https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil/issues/2621) regarding event listener and Lighthouse complaining about the fact that it is not `passive`.

I tried to answer but well, my data connection was really bad 😔. I will try to check the issue tonight or tomorrow.

## Conclusion

A nice presentation of what's upcoming in Stencil v2 and some exchange about the community questions.

Another awesome Stencil Contributors Chat 🥳
