# Stencil Contributors Chat (2020-09-09)

We can see Adam’s OUTATIME license plate and it is pretty cool (personally I don’t like that Brewers banner but that’s a pretty neat setup)

Lerna Watch at a collection, seems the fix will not be simple.
- The collection has to get built itself and it has it's own distribution that gets linked but when that changes it is not easy to watch those unlinked items. 
- The current fix is restarting the consuming app.
- Adding a node watch on files ending on TS, it is possible to re-trigger the stencil configuration but after Stencil 2, that fix was also broken.
- NX is a possible alternative but it requires a global package.json to be consumed by all child packages instead of separating all of them in independent packages.
- By building every package one by one, the final compile does build successfully.


Adam is working on improving the static site generation but they found some areas where it can be much faster and act more like next-js.
- The router will be able to get a parse function that will happen at build time. @stencil/markdown will have the functions to include the new pre-render stuff and the new stencil router makes sure that the flickering dissapears.
- Using the capacitor site as the first test and then the stencil site with new system should be simpler for also anyone else who
- stencil roter-v2 does not have any components so with Stencil 2 it makes it simples even where there is no web components constructed by the router.
- When it goes between 2 different routes now it will wait for any lazy loaded elements. Also, on page load, all of the pre-fetch elements are gathered so that the routing becomes faster.

> Would pre-rendering work with ion-router?

It should but it might be needed to redo that in order to use stencil router as a base.

> What is it that is being preloaded at build time?

The state data that builds that page is turned into json data that is put into the html. This automatically hydrates the pre-rendered application and starts lazy-loading the required next elements. This is very similar to what Next does: using every page as a component that can be pre-rendered and pre-hydrated with state.

> There are a lot of improvements for the V2 router:

The dev server is also improving as it will only pre-render the target page that is needing to change instead of re-building all of the pages.

> Is there a way in which we can know if the application is in the process of navigating?

It is possible and the router will wait for the time it requires to pre-fetch the next needed components. It is important to show that "something" is happening (like a loading bar on the top for instance), the idea would be to have a reporting way that this is happening from the router itself.

CORY
- Developing on Stencil 2, the build folter is not fully replaced and some files are not being created properly, the manual fix is deleting the www folder in order to create a proper prod build. Seems to be a missing pointer to old files created during build time.

SVEN
- The docs has not followed up to all of the small tweaks, is there a way we can help or make propositions to bettering things on the docs?

PRs are welcome to the Stencil site, gotta be added to the contributors group.

- Wondering if pre-rendering is SEO friendly: It can be true on how people can be writing them. Stencil pre-rendering will actually turn the components into html and text that the search engines can read.
